## Gamma-I-Class creatures

A `GAMMA` program is then an extension of a basic `BETA` program. It has some strong `ALPHA` characteristics at first, but given some experience with the world, these purely reflexive
responses give way to `BETA`-like responses. However, given some BETA-like experience, which also fades into the background in favor of even higher-order `GAMMA` responses, problems never
encountered before are solved using theories generated by past successes.

GENERALIZATION IS THE KEY TO `GAMMA` BEHAVIOR

A `Gamma-Class` machine is able to anticipate future problems by generalizing some of the relevant qualities of first-hand experiences. As an example, suppose you were taught on the blackboard in your grade school that `2` plus `2` equals `4`. Each time the teacher wrote `2 + 2 = ?` on that same blackboard you then knew the correct response is the numeral `4`. You soon learned to solve the problem perfectly, using direct experiences of the past to solve a problem of the present. But, what if the teacher then tests your learning by showing you the same problem written on a sheet of paper. Could you handle that? The problem is the same `2 + 2 = ?` but the situation forsolving it is somewhat different — it's on a sheet of paper rather than the blackboard.

You certainly should be able to work the problem just as well. You have the ability to generalize first hand experiences capturing the essential elements of the problem so you can deal with it under a wide variety of different, but non-relevant, conditions in the future. The essential elements of this situation are that `2 + 2 = 4`, and the solution is the same whether the problem is presented on the blackboard, a sheet of paper, or, for that matter, any other appropriate medium. This sort of generalizing process sounds easy in the context of intelligent human beings. It isn’t all that easy for a machine, however. Machines tend to be very literal in their interpretation of surrounding conditions. In order to recognize a problem once solved in the past, it must perceive every element of the environment as being exactly the same as before. `Beta-Class` machines work that way.

A `Gamma-Class` machine searches its memory for the relevant conditions of problems and then attempts to fit the relevant ideas into a framework of non-relevant surroundings that might
occur in the future. It is thus prepared to deal with the situation under a variety of different conditions. All of the `ALPHA-I` and `BETA-I` creatures described are capable of recognizing and responding to 24 different environmental conditions. It might be argued that there are actually an infinite number of environmental conditions that can be solved using any of 24 possible responses. But no matter how you look at it, there are 24 kinds of relevant condition-response situations.

Now, suppose you have a `BETA` creature that has established a habit pattern of motion, and it is dealing with maybe 5 different condition-response situations quite effectively. In fact, the creature's responses are so effective that the confidence levels for those responses grows to a maximum of 4. The remaining responses have much lower confidence levels, however. Most of the remaining responses have confidence levels of zero. What happens when you disturb the habit pattern? Well, if the disturbance calls for encountering a brand new environmental situation, the `BETA` creature sees a confidence level of zero and switches over to `ALPHA`-like behavior to come up with a workable response on the spot.

But now suppose this same `BETA` creature, the one that has established a habit pattern of motion made up of 5 different condition-response situations, has a built-in `GAMMA` mechanism.
In this case, the system is sensitive to confidence levels of 4. The moment it finds a confidence level of 4, the `GAMMA` creature breaks down the situation into its most relevant components, searching its own memory for those same elements as they exist in bits and pieces at very low confidence levels - `0` or `1` to be exact. Upon discovering the relevant elements of a successful response residing in memory and carrying very low confidence levels, `GAMMA` inserts the successful elements into those places. What works quite well under one set of conditions ought to work just as well under similar conditions not yet encountered on a first-hand basis.

In a manner of speaking, `GAMMA` generates theories about what should work under untested conditions. The theories are well founded, being based upon elements of responses that have been
quite successful in the past. A `GAMMA` creature performs this sort of routine on every response in memory that carries a confidence level of 4. Once the job is done, there are few condition-response places in memory left untouched. Disturbing a `GAMMA` creature in such a way that it faces a situation for the first time does not automatically throw back into
`ALPHA`-type behavior. A theory, or at least bits and pieces of a theory, exist in most places in a trained `GAMMA` memory. It has had a chance to presuppose what it should do when you disturb it. So when you disturb its habit pattern of motion, it calls upon the theory and executes it.

If the theory works—if the creature’s conjecture has been correct — `GAMMA` immediately solves the problem and increasesits confidence level for that condition-response combination. What
was first established by conjecture is now confirmed by first-hand experience. The creature had no need to resort to `ALPHA`-creature behavior. Of course, there will be times when the creature’s conjectures are not correct for one reason or another. A theory based upon first-hand, successful experiences of the past simple doesn’t do the job. In that case, `GAMMA` is forced to resort to `ALPHA` behavior, picking up a random response that solves the problem. The new, randomly generated response soon becomes part of `GAMMA`'s storehouse of relevant knowledge, and it is then used for modifying other conjectured responses.

A `GAMMA` creature is fully capable of changing its mind — the quality of its conjectured responses—as it gathers further first-hand experience. So `GAMMA` not only works to perfect its responses, but its conjectured responses as well. A `BETA` creature only works to perfect its overt, first-hand experiences, having no regard for possibilities of the future. The bottom line is that a `GAMMA` creature is surperbly equipped to deal with new circumstances. It adapts quite readily to disturbances in its environment—it is prepared to do so. As a result, the adaptation curves for a `GAMMA` creature are smoother and rise more steadily than they do for a `BETA` creature.