## Beta-II-Class creatures

Restructuring a BETA-I scheme to fit the definition of a `Level-II` mechanism isn’t a very difficult task, especially if you use the ALPHA-II programs as a starting point. Just as you built a basic BETA-I program from the ALPHA-I version, you will use the ALPHA-II programs to build-up the BETA-II system described in this chapter. The idea is to give a BETA creature an extended sensory system, making it sensitive to the quality of different kinds of objects on the screen. The most important feature of the job is seeing how the Beta memory can be extended to include the additional sensory parameters.

The first program is simple a conversion demonstration. It shows how you can use the flowchart for a standard BETA program and rework the operations to fit an entirely different programming scheme. Specifically, these BETA-II programs use the faster `POKE` and `PEEK` graphics in place of the slower `SET` and `RESET` versions used for all `Level-I` programsk.
The first program is listed as a _BETA-II_ program, but it really does not include provisions for making it behave any differently from a BETA-I scheme. The potential for generating a BETA-II mode of behavior is inherent in the system, however. The second program lets the creature print tracks wherever it moves on the screen. You will find that the creature is insensitive to its own tracks, responding only to the border figure. This is true `Level-II` activity, because the creature is able to distinguish one of its own footprints from the border figure, and respond appropriately. This program is actually the only proper sort of BETA traildrawing scheme. You worked with a trail-drawing BETA-I program, but in that case, it was necessary to violate some of the most important definitions of real robotics in order to get the job done. This is a job for BETA-II, and you see how it all works out without violating any of the basic principles.

The third program clearly demonstrates BETA-II learning and adaptive behavior. The screen is filled with obstacles of different kinds, and the BETA creature responds as though they are all the same sort of obstacle. The creature can sense the presence of the obstacles, but cannot distinguish them from the border figure. It might seem that building this third program is a waste of time and effort. Why bother with a BETA-II creature that cannot tell the difference between one object and another? I originally devised the program because it represented the next logical step in the evolution of BETA-II adaptive intelligence. At the time, it seemed to be a rather routine matter brought about by logical neccesity rather than desire to make a big leap forward in the evolutionary scheme. And being a rather routine step, I thought I'd merely file away the results in my personal file of experiments and not bother to include it. Something hapened a few days later, however, that changed my casual perspective on the matter.Nowadays, I am quite excited about the newly discovered significance of this second BETA-II program. Before attempting to explain its special significance, I must describe the fourth programr.

The fourth program, yet another logical step in the evolutionary scheme, allows the creature to sense the qualitative differences between the various objects on the screen. The Beta memory is expanded so that the creature has a memory of how it dealt with the various objects in the past. The significant point is that the BETA-II creature can respond to one of
the objects in a fashion that is quite different from the way it responds to the others. Each object on the screen plays a different role in the creature’s activity. Exactly how the creature responds to a contact situation depends upon which object is involved in that particular contact. Like BETA-I creatures, these BETA-IIs soon set up a certain habit pattern of motion. The obstacles included within the border figure play important roles in the configuration of each creature's basic habit pattern. I expected that to happen, but little more than that. However, it didn’t take long to find out that BETA-II creatures respond to disturbance operations in a fascinating and wholly unexpected way. Whenever a BETA-II is first allowed to establish its habit pattern of motion and then disturbed, it tends to go back to that same pattern—even at the same place on the screen!

It turns out that BETA-II creatures are goal-seeking creatures. I had not expected to observe any goal-seeking activity with anything less than a GAMMA-II. Let the critter extablish its habit pattern, move it somewhere else on the screen, and launch it with any motion code. It seeks out the original habit pattern and the same general place in the "room" it worked before.
Occasionally, the creature responds to a disturbance by setting up a new habit pattern somewhere else on the screen. And sometimes it works its way to the original position on the screen,
but adds a couple of flourishes to the motion pattern. More often than not, however, the creature find its way to the original position on the screen and executes the very same habit pattern of motion.

The third program became important after I noted the goal-seeking success of the creature built from the fourth program. Using the third program, the habit-pattern, goal-seeking
features are present, but the creature isn’t always so successful in carrying them out. In this case, a disturbance is just about as likely to create a new habit pattern at a new place on the screen. The lesson to be learned from comparing the third and fourth programs in this chapter is that the ability to discern the differences between different objects, respond to each of them in a unique fashion, and remember all the responses, gives the creature an apparent appreciation for where it is located in the "room". The creature uses its knowledge of the different objects as cues to its location.

By way of comparison, a creature that is unable to distinguish the various objects from one another - as in the third program - cannot take positional cues from those objects, and thus owes no particular allegiance to playing in one special part of the screen. If you have been schooled in traditional machine control technology, I think you will be able to appreciate the power and elegance of these notions. Just look around at other so-called _robots_ capable of keeping track of their position in the environment. You run into things such as expensive stepping motors, elaborate pattern-recognition schemes, and, above all, very sophisticated logic, control, and memory systems. All a BETA-II machine has to be able to do is sense contact
with an object, determine the unique properties of that object, and then remember what action it took to get away from it. If you trick the machine by moving one of its cue objects, it will be upset temporarily, of course, But it will adapt to the situation in some way, attempting to set up a new habit pattern of motion or wandering around until it stumbles across the object you moved out of place.

Take an ordinary _robot_ and disturb its environment in a similar way, and the thing gets all out of whack. The elaborate "room plan" stored in its memory no longer serves the proper
purpose—at best, it will turn away from an object that no longer exists in its path. At worst, the mismatch between the original surroundings (stored in memory) and the new surroundings causes the machine to run completely out of sync with its environment. You then are the victim of those nasty little cartoons and comedy routines that portray robots as mindless critters which execute a certain activity entirely inappropriate to the situation at hand.